From: "Vince Scheib" <scheib@cs.unc.edu>
Date: Thu, 26 Sep 2002 22:05:43 -0400
To:

> do you know about unix?

Unix is a word used to refer to many unix-like operating 
systems (One of which was really called unix a long time 
ago). Many computers are designed with the intent of having 
unix run on them, but there is a separation between machine 
and operating system.

The operating system is just the software which takes care 
of running other software. IE, windows allows you to run 
lots of programs that are written to run on windows.

Linux is a unix-like operating system designed to run on the 
same kinds of computers that run Windows.

Unix was designed for the older, bigger, shared computers. 
An important trait is that many users can be logged in at 
once. For this, you usually think of a unix machine as some 
big computer far away, and you're connecting to it. In the 
old days, dumb terminals sat on people's desks. These 
weren't really "computers", just the bare necessities to 
connect to a computer (keyboard, monitor, and a little tiny 
bit of thinking).

The basic way to use a unix machine is by telnet and a 
command prompt. Telnet is a program. It is very simple. It 
sends text in two directions, from you to elsewhere, and 
vice versa. A command prompt is a way to issue commands and 
start programs. DOS (Disk Operating System) is a command 
prompt operating system. You type text like "type 
textfile.txt" and stuff happens.

You unix machines also have graphical user interfaces (GUIs 
pronounced Gooey). Windows is a GUI. Apple computers have a 
GUI (these days). unix machines even let you use a GUI when 
you're not really at the computer. That's call Xwindows.

If you use unix machines, you'll probably only use the text 
interface. From your windows machine you can easily connect 
that way. You could, if you wanted, connect with xwindows. 
You'd have to install special software to do that, however. 
If you go to a computer lab, there very well may be unix 
terminals (perhaps even dumb ones) you can use for the unix 
systems.

Why would you use unix? Well, many things that do things for 
a long time, reliably, and for many people, run on unix. 
Email, web page servers, telephone systems, printers and 
print managers, big computational thingies, air traffic 
control, are all examples.

Why would YOU use unix? Well, posting web pages is done 
(usually) on unix machines (and when it's not unix, it's 
done in very unix ways). Some software like Mathematica is 
probably available there -- and if you had to let it crunch 
number for days you'd want it to happen on a unix server. If 
you had computer files you wanted to open anywhere on 
campus, instead of carrying them you just save them to your 
unix account.

The unix methodology is to have many very small programs 
that do a simple thing. Want to copy a file? Use the File 
Transfer Protocol (FTP). Want to launch a program, just use 
a command prompt unless you really need that whole big & 
slow GUI. et cetera.

The result is that you can not use unix without some 
reference. Many things in windows aren't so hard to figure 
out because 1) they're visual, just look and experiment with 
things and 2) there's online help available that is much 
easier to use than the help available from a command line.

Is there really a reason for you to use unix? Probably not. 
Is it a useful thing to know how to use, quite. Would you 
really find it useful, no. Unless, of course, you had to use 
it, but you probably don't.

I walk through minefields and watch your head rock.

-- Vincent Scheib <<><>> http://www.scheib.net/

